Ours are the only mounds making up a distinct mound-region on Canadian
soil. This comes to us as a part of the large inheritance which we who
have migrated to Manitoba receive. No longer cribbed, cabined, and
confined, we have in this our "greater Canada" a far wider range of
study than in the fringe along the Canadian lakes. Think of a thousand
miles of prairie! The enthusiastic Scotsman was wont to despise our
level Ontario, because it had no Grampians, but the mountains of
Scotland all piled together would reach but to the foot hills of our
Rockies. The Ontario geologist can only study the rocks in garden
plots, while the Nor'wester revels in the age of reptiles in his
hundreds of miles of Cretaceous rocks, with the largest coal and iron
area on the continent. As with our topography so with history. The
career of the Hudson's Bay Company, which is in fact the history of
Rupert's Land, began 120 years before the history of Ontario, and
there were forts of the two rival Fur Companies on the Saskatchewan
and throughout the country, before the first U. E. Loyalist felled a
forest tree in Upper Canada. We are especially fortunate in being the
possessors also of a field for archaeological study in the portion of
the area occupied by the mound builders--the lost race, whose fate has
a strange fascination for all who enquire into the condition of
Ancient America.

The Indian guide points out these mounds to the student of history
with a feeling of awe; he says he knows nothing of them; his fathers
have told him that the builders of the mounds were of a different race
from them--that the mounds are memorials of a vanished people--the
"Ke-te-anish-i-na-be," or "very ancient men." The oldest Hudson's Bay
officer, and the most intelligent of the native people, born in the
country, can only give some vague story of their connection with a
race who perished with small-pox, but who, or whence, or of what
degree of civilization they were, no clue is left.

It must be said moreover that a perusal of the works written about the
mounds, especially of the very large contributions to the subject
found in the Smithsonian Institution publications, leaves the mind of
the reader in a state of thorough confusion and uncertainty. Indeed,
the facts relating to the Mound Builders are as perplexing a problem
as the purpose of the Pyramids, or the story of King Arthur.

Is it any wonder that we hover about the dark mystery, and find in our
researches room for absorbing study, even though we cannot reach
absolute certainty? Could you have seen the excitement which prevailed
among the half-dozen settlers, I had employed in digging the mound on
Rainy River, in August last, when the perfect pottery cup figured
below was found, and the wild enthusiasm with which they prosecuted
their further work, you would have said it requires no previous
training, but simply a successful discovery or two to make any one a
zealous mound explorer.

A MOUND DESCRIBED.

A mound of the kind found in our region is a very much flattened cone,
or round-topped hillock of earth. It is built usually, if not
invariably where the soil is soft and easily dug, and it is generally
possible to trace in its neighborhood the depression whence the mound
material has been taken. The mounds are as a rule found in the midst
of a fertile section of country, and it is pretty certain from this
that the mound builders were agriculturists, and chose their dwelling
places with their occupation in view, where the mounds are found. The
mounds are found accordingly on the banks of the Rainy River and Red
River, and their affluents in the Northwest, in other words upon our
best land stretches, but not so far as observed around the Lake of the
Woods, or in barren regions. Near fishing grounds they greatly abound.
What seem to have been strategic points upon the river were selected
for their sites. The promontory giving a view and so commanding a
considerable stretch of river, the point at the junction of two
rivers, or the debouchure of a river into a lake or vice versa is a
favorite spot. At the Long Sault on Rainy River there are three or
four mounds grouped together along a ridge. Here some persons of
strong imagination profess to see remains of an ancient fortification,
but to my mind this is mere fancy. Mounds in our region vary from 6 to
50 feet in height, and from 60 to 130 feet in diameter. Some are
circular at the base, others are elliptical.

MOUND REGIONS.

The mounds have long been known as occurring in Central America, in
Mexico, and along the whole extent of the Mississippi valley from the
Gulf of Mexico to the great lakes. Our Northwest has, however, been
neglected in the accounts of the mound-bearing region. Along our Red
River I can count some six or eight mounds that have been noted in
late years, and from the banks having been peopled and cultivated I
have little doubt that others have been obliterated. One formerly
stood on the site of the new unfinished Canadian Pacific Hotel in this
city. The larger number of those known are in the neighborhood of the
rapids, 16 or 18 miles below Winnipeg where the fishing is good. In
1879 the Historical Society opened one of these, and obtained a
considerable quantity of remains. It is reported that there are mounds
also on Nettley Creek, a tributary of the lower Red River, also on
Lake Manitoba and some of its affluents. During the past summer it was
my good fortune to visit the Rainy River, which lies some half way of
the distance from Winnipeg to Lake Superior. In that delightful
stretch of country, extending for 90 miles along the river there are
no less than 21 mounds. These I identify with the mounds of Red River.
The communication between Red and Rainy River is effected by ascending
the Red Lake River, and coming by portage to a river running from the
south into Rainy River. Both Red and Rainy River easily connect with
the head waters of the Mississippi. Our region then may be regarded as
a self-contained district including the most northerly settlements of
the strange race who built the mounds. I shall try to connect them
with other branches of the same stock, lying further to the east and
south. For convenience I shall speak of the extinct people who
inhabited our special region as the _Takawgamis_, or farthest north
mound builders.

MOUND VARIETIES.

The thirty or forty mounds discovered up to this time in this region
of the Takawgamis have, so far as examined, a uniform structure. Where
stone could be obtained there is found below the surface of the ground
a triple layer of flat limestone blocks, placed in an imbricated
manner over the remains interred. In one mound, at the point where the
Rainy Lake enters the Rainy River, there is a mound situated on the
property of Mr. Pither, Indian agent, in which there was found on
excavation, a structure of logs some 10 feet square, and from six to
eight feet high. In all the others yet opened the structure has been
simply of earth of various kinds heaped together. It is possible that
the mound containing the log erection may have been for sacrifice, for
the logs are found to have been charred. One purpose of all the mounds
of the Takawgamis was evidently sepulture; and in them all, charcoal
lumps, calcined bones and other evidences of fire are found. It would
seem from their position that all the mounds of this region were for
the purpose of observation as well as sepulture. The two purposes in
no way antagonize. For the better understanding of the whole I have
selected the largest mound of the Takawgamis yet discovered, and will
describe it more minutely.

THE GRAND MOUND.

It is situated on the Rainy River, about 20 miles from the head of
Rainy River. It stands on a point of land where the Missachappa or
Bowstring River and the Rainy River join. There is a dense forest
covering the river bank where the mound is found. The owner of the
land has made a small clearing, which now shows the mound to some
extent to one standing on the deck of a steamer passing on the river.
The distance back from the water's edge is about 50 yards. The mound
strikes you with great surprise as your eye first catches it. Its
crest is covered with lofty trees, which overtop the surrounding
forest. These thriving trees, elm, soft maple, basswood and poplar, 60
or 70 feet high now thrust their root tendrils deep into the aforetime
softened mould. A foot or more of a mass of decayed leaves and other
vegetable matter encases the mound. The brushy surface of the mound
has been cleared by the owner, and the thicket formerly upon it
removed. The circumference of one fine poplar was found to be 4 feet
10 inches; of another tree, 5 feet 6 inches, but the largest had
lately fallen. Around the stump the last measured seven feet. The
mound is eliptical at the base. The longest diameter, that is from
east to west, the same direction as the course of the river, is 117
feet. The corresponding shorter diameter from north to south is 90
feet. The circumference of the mound is consequently 325 feet. The
highest point of the mound is 45 feet above the surrounding level of
the earth. As to height the mound does not compare unfavorably with
the celebrated mound at Miamisburg, Ohio, known as one of the class of
"observation mounds," which is 68 feet high and 852 feet around the
base. In addition to its purpose of sepulture, everything goes to show
that the "Grand Mound" of Rainy River was for observation as well.

THE EXCAVATION.

Two former attempts had been made to open this mound. One of these had
been made in the top, and the large skull before you was then
obtained. A more extensive effort was that made in 1883, by Mr. E.
McColl, Indian agent, Mr. Crowe, H. B. Co. officer of Fort Frances,
and a party of men. Their plan was to run a tunnel from north to south
through the base of the mound. They had penetrated some ten or fifteen
feet, found some articles of interest, and had then given up the
undertaking. Having employed a number of men, settlers in the
neighborhood, I determined to continue the tunnel for a certain
distance through the mound, all the way if indications were favorable,
and then to pierce the mound from the top. The men in two parties went
industriously to work on the opposite sides, working toward each
other, making a tunnel about eight feet in diameter. The earth though
originally soft soil had become so hard that it was necessary to use a
pick axe to loosen it for the spade. A number of skeletons were found
on the south side, but all I should say within ten feet from the
original surface of the mound. As we penetrated the interior fewer
remains were continually found. The earth gave many indications of
having been burnt. At one point the pick-axe sank ten inches into the
hard wall. This was about fifteen feet from the outside. The excavator
then dug out with his hand from a horizontal pocket in the earth eight
or ten inches wide and eighteen or twenty inches deep, a quantity of
soft brown dust, and a piece of bone some four inches long, a part of
a human forearm bone. This pocket was plainly the original resting
place of a skeleton, probably in a sitting posture. As deeper
penetration was made brown earthy spots without a trace of bone
remaining were come upon. The excavation on the south side was
continued for thirty feet into the mound, but at this stage it was
evident that bones, pottery, etc., had been so long interred that they
were reduced to dust. No hope seemed to remain now of finding objects
of interest in this direction, and so with about forty feet yet
wanting to complete, the tunnel, the search was transferred to the top
of the mound.

THE UPPER CUT.

Beginning on the crest of the mound, the mould was removed over a
considerable space, and though some trouble was found from the
presence of the roots of the growing trees, yet three or four feet
from the surface human bones and skeletons began to occur. In some
cases a complete skeleton was found, in other cases what seemed to be
a circle of skulls, buried alongside charred bones, fragments of
pottery and other articles. Several different excavations were made on
the mound surface, and it was found that every part from the base to
the crest contained bones and skeletons, to the depth of from six to
ten feet as already said; bones and articles of interest were found
thus far; deeper than this nothing. I shall now describe the articles
found in this mound, and refer in some cases to what has been found in
the other mounds of the Takawgamis.
